this is planet money from
NPR hey it's Mary child's it is the
season of giving as you may know and in
that Spirit here at Planet Money we
thought we could give you something
you'd actually maybe really like no not
cash that is a good idea though we have
picked our very favorite episodes that
are normally just for Planet Money plus
supporters and we're making those
favorite episodes available for everyone
this month if you you are a planet money
plus listener you got a chance to hear
today's episode a while back and we are
so so grateful for your support steady
Dependable contributions really matter
in a world of public media especially
now and if you are not a supporter and
you're interested in hearing more
episodes like this one you can sign up
at plus. npr.org and you will also hear
all of our regular episodes without
sponsor messages okay so do you remember
the big messy fights this year over the
US debt limit the US has hit its debt
ceiling Congress and the White House are
in a standoff the impass could end in a
federal default and economic disaster
here is what Yesa yadav a professor at
Vanderbilt University's law school told
me about it at the time we look like
idiots to the rest of the world I mean I
think there's no other way to put it
that we are playing with our own
National economy luckily that will never
happen again I'm just kidding the debt
limit was suspended until
2025 so year after next we might be
watching the very same fight again and
for economists and Market experts like
yesi adav it's a hard fight to watch
because it could compromise something
hugely important to the economy the
Safety and Security of the US Treasury
Market treasuries are US Government debt
they're called treasuries CU they come
from the treasury Department do you get
it when the US government sells a
treasury it's saying hey you give me
some money I'll pay you back later and
I'll give you these little interest
payments along the way to make it worth
your while so we have an asset that's
supposed to be default free that the US
will always pay its debts on time it's
an asset you can trade super in uh and
out off which means you can turn it into
cash whenever you want and the US uses
the money to fund basically everything
the interstate the post office the
different water sources that you use
we're using the money to essentially
fund our daily
live treasuries US Government debt they
make life as we know it possible they
also help fund our big beautiful
bailouts and our Federal Reserve lending
programs on top of all of that
treasuries are crucial to keeping the
entire Financial system functioning they
are a super powerful and important tool
but also the market for them may be more
fragile than we know in this episode we
are going to talk about why this
conversation is like many that we bring
you in Planet Money plus bonus episodes
it's the kind that we have with many
really smart people all the time
portions go into our regular episodes
but our supporters get to hear a much
longer version so here is my
conversation with Yesa
[Music]
yev can you tell me what benefit we
derive from having treasuries be so
risk-free we derive just this Superstar
ability to
borrow you know this is a way in which
we can reliably Finance ourselves
without looking to taxpayers to foot the
bill um and it's also super helpful in
situations where every other part of the
financial architecture is falling apart
so because treasuries are risk-free it
means that people pile into them
whenever there's a problem and it means
that we can borrow super cheaply when
everything else is really expensive and
we we saw that during covid we saw that
during the financial crisis where it was
essentially free for the government to
borrow and that privilege is so powerful
because it means we can Finance
ourselves that much cheaply out of
disasters that the rest of the world
faces a much more expensive job having
to deal with okay so so treasury markets
you you mentioned that these things are
traded a lot these things are traded a
lot the standard Spiel that you will
read on any New York fed or any US
Treasury document about the treasury
market is that it's the deepest and most
liquid Market in the world that is a
Spiel and that what that means is that
when you buy a treasury when you lend
money to the US government you should be
able to trade that claim super easily
super cheaply and very very stable
prices and that means that no one is
taking on a whole bunch of worry when
they lend money to the US government
they know that if they need to liquidate
if they need to turn it into Cash they
can do that super easily and because of
how how easy it is to get out of these
things how easy it is to trade um in and
out of treasuries that makes them useful
right like they start to show up other
places can you help me understand where
treasuries show up that's not just their
own Market it's an incredible question
so the entire Financial system stability
that we have today depends on us
treasuries it is the most incredibly
powerful asset that is the anchor for
the global financial markets to stay in
one piece uh is the way to describe it
essentially so Regulators have felt that
this is the perfect asset to make into
the safest asset that Financial firms
can keep and so since 2008 2010 um they
have really doubled down on this
assumption and they have made
essentially every regulated Financial
firm keep a whole buffer of treasuries
within their coffers um in in order to
maintain their own institutional
stability that's a key part of the post-
crisis Financial architecture I don't
think I really understood that as like
it is a doubling down like before it was
sort of like the market had agreed to
some extent it was more that the market
had agreed that we all love this asset
the most and it's the risest free asset
and we Benchmark everything off of it
but in the post crisis regulation it
that became more codified that became
incredibly codified so the do Frank act
for example has a number of Provisions
that speak to firms maintaining high
quality liquid assets the best kind of
hqaa it's called high quality liquid
asset alongside cash is a treasury um
it's treated equivalent to cash even
though it's not equivalent but is
treated equivalent to cash which means
that Banks hedge funds mutual funds you
name it fund has to keep a bunch of
treasuries in order to comply with that
regulation and that's not all
essentially what has also happened is in
the case of the private agreements that
Financial firms make with each other so
Mary if you and I are Financial firms
and we are borrowing and lending to each
other we don't want to do a whole bunch
of due diligence because we don't have
the time so we're like you know what I
lend you that money and you give me
treasuries as collateral which means I
don't have to do a whole bunch of
Investigation on you I don't have to
spend a ton of time looking at your FICO
score and whatnot I'll just know that I
have the treasuries as collateral I can
sell them and I'll be okay in the event
that you default so treasuries as
collateral have become a key part of how
private interactions within the
financial markets are conducted and how
private parties keep themselves safe in
credit relationships now there's one
market in particular that's very very
very powerful at doing this and it's
called the market for repurchase
contracts or the repo market and that's
a Lifeline for financial firms where
they are lending to each other on a very
short-term basis it's how they live
every single day and this Market is not
regulated in a very prescriptive way
it's regulated through the fact of
having collateralization and that's
dependent on the US Treasury being
default free and being highly liquid
okay so how how many trillions of
dollars are we talking in the in the
repurchase Market um it shrunk a little
bit but last time I checked um it was
approximately $4.5 trillion in the
bilateral repo Market where they're
interacting with each other you know
different components vary in how much
they use treasuries but approximately
it's around 67 to 70% of all
transactions in this market are
collateralized through treasuries how
many treasuries are there outstanding
and how many are used as collateral and
how does like are they floating around
like where are
they that is a impossible question very
hard
question
and and the reason for that is that we
don't really know um and I would tell
you something that might freak you out a
little bit which is that Regulators
themselves don't monitor how treasuries
are collateralized within this different
borrowing and lending Market that
Financial firms use the report market
and in fact what tends to happen is that
a single treasury is collateralized
multiple times oh no so one treas y yes
so one treasury is used multiple times U
for multiple different debts now there's
great work coming out the IMF Manan
Singh Dr Manan Singh does this work and
what he has posited is that one treasury
is being used three times to catalized
debt like at once like at one time
potentially at once yeah doesn't that
mean if one person defaults they're like
give me that Treasury and the other
person's like oh I don't actually have
it it's over there and then the other
person's like I too don't have it and
there's no reporting mechanism so no one
really can trace these things either um
for once I'm like Pro blockchain all of
a sudden I've become I was thinking the
same thing I was like wait you know what
let's just put it in the blockchain it
would really solve something for once I
don't know why don't you know we have a
we have a use case finally oh um people
are gonna be so excited when they hear
this okay so without the blockchain so
so that seems bad and like an inherent
fragility that we don't know about are
the other ways like the thing that I
feel like about treasuries and you've
you've sort of talked about this already
a little bit but like it seems to me
like they're everywhere in ways that I
don't know like they're collateralized
they're like showing up in in other like
repo like are there other places that I
don't know about that they're sneaking
around you know when you uh have your
401k the mutual fund invests a whole
chisel ton in treasuries um they put a
whole bunch of the money that they get
into these Prime funds which are
treasury funds and the reason why a
whole bunch of these mutual funds do
that kind of thing is because it's safe
right and so uh what that means is that
it's safe and it's liquid um treasuries
are also desirable so they can lend them
out if they have to um but you know this
is the way in which we provide our
financial services and we take for
granted the fact that we can use
treasuries to balance our portfolios
have this super safe layer here and
ultimately what this is doing is
unlocking the credit unlocking the
liquidity that we all need in order for
the banks to give us the loans for the
mutual funds to then be able to invest
in potentially riskier assets because
they have the segment that is also super
safe that we can then you know have this
borrowing within the marketplace um that
allows us to essentially get our life
the way that we have it and that we
become used to so treasuries as the
Lynch pin that unlocks that credit that
makes so much sense so it's kind of it
feels like it's like this invisible
agreement that we've all made that like
if we can just agree that a treasury is
a treasury is a treasury and we all
think it's perfectly safe then we can
operate in our day-to-day but if we have
to start questioning a treasury the
whole thing falls down if we're starting
to question the treasury this officially
becomes like The Avengers blip right
like you know this is the only way that
I can Envision it um that we are just
blipped um and the world as we know it
does not look the same
and if we have politicians that are
potentially playing you know pickle ball
with a nuclear weapon economically then
we are not
[Music]
safe thank you again to Yesa yiv at
Vanderbilt law we make episodes like
this one every other week for our planet
money plus supporters two extra episodes
a month usually they're a little bit
more wonky a little bit more in the
weeds but not always sometimes they're
goofy sometimes we go behind the scenes
and open up our process you can sign up
for Planet Money Plus at plus. npr.org
and the real reason isn't the
sponsorship free listening or the bonus
episodes even it's actually supporting
public media journalism direct
membership support helps us stay
independent and strong especially in
turbulent times and plus you do get a
discount on merch okay okay that is
Planet Money plus plus. npr.org I'm
married child and we are back with a new
regular episode in a few days about
advertising and why the 1990s saw so
many of the most memorable ads of all
time thank you for listening to Planet
money from
[Music]
[Applause]
NPR